README.md, before:

# Closed-Loop Supervised Fine-Tuning of Tokenized Traffic Models


<p align="center">
     <img src="docs/catk_banner.png" alt="Closest Among Top-K (CAT-K) rollouts unroll the policy during fine-tuning in a way that visited states remain close to the ground-truth.", width=760px>
     <br/><strong>Closest Among Top-K (CAT-K) Rollouts</strong> unroll the policy during fine-tuning in a way that visited states remain close to the ground-truth (GT). At each time step, CAT-K first takes the top-K most likely action tokens according to the policy, then chooses the one leading to the state closest to the GT. As a result, CAT-K rollouts follow the mode of the GT (e.g., turning left), while random or top-K rollouts can lead to large deviations (e.g., going straight or right). Since the policy is essentially trained to minimize the distance between the rollout states and the GT states, the GT-based supervision remains effective for CAT-K rollouts, but not for random or top-K rollouts.
</p>

> **Closed-Loop Supervised Fine-Tuning of Tokenized Traffic Models**            
> [Zhejun Zhang](https://zhejz.github.io/), [Peter Karkus](https://karkus.tilda.ws/), [Maximilian Igl](https://maximilianigl.com/), [Wenhao Ding](https://wenhao.pub/), [Yuxiao Chen](https://research.nvidia.com/labs/avg/author/yuxiao-chen/), [Boris Ivanovic](https://www.borisivanovic.com/) and [Marco Pavone](https://web.stanford.edu/~pavone/index.html).<br/>
> 
> [Project Page](https://zhejz.github.io/catk)<br/>
> [arXiv Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.05334)

```bibtex
@article{zhang2024closed,
  title = {Closed-Loop Supervised Fine-Tuning of Tokenized Traffic Models},
  author = {Zhang, Zhejun and Karkus, Peter and Igl, Maximilian and Ding, Wenhao and Chen, Yuxiao and Ivanovic, Boris and Pavone, Marco},
  journal={arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05334},
  year = {2024},
}
```


## Installation
- The easy way to setup the environment is to create a [conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html) environment using the following commands
  ```
  conda create -y -n catk python=3.11.9
  conda activate catk
  conda install -y -c conda-forge ffmpeg=4.3.2
  pip install -r install/requirements.txt
  pip install torch_geometric
  pip install torch_scatter torch_cluster -f https://data.pyg.org/whl/torch-2.4.0+cu121.html
  pip install --no-deps waymo-open-dataset-tf-2-12-0==1.6.4
  ```
- Alternatively, a better way is to use the [Dockerfile](install/Dockerfile) and build your own docker. We found the code runs faster in the docker for some reasons.
- We use [WandB](https://wandb.ai/) for logging. You can register an account for free.
- **Be aware**
  - We use 8 *NVIDIA A100 (80GB)* for training and validation, the training and fine-tuning take a few days, whereas the validation and testing take a few hours.
  - We cannot share pre-trained models according to the [terms](https://waymo.com/open/terms) of the Waymo Open Motion Dataset.


## Dataset preparation
- Download the [Waymo Open Motion Dataset](https://waymo.com/open/download/). We use v1.2.1.
- Use [scripts/cache_womd.sh](scripts/cache_womd.sh) to preprocess the dataset into pickle files to accelerate data loading during the training and evaluation.
- You should pack three datasets: `training`, `validation` and `testing`.

## Run the code
In the scripts, we provide
- [scripts/train.sh](scripts/train.sh) for training and fine-tuning.
- [scripts/local_val.sh](scripts/local_val.sh) for local validation.
- [scripts/wosac_sub.sh](scripts/wosac_sub.sh) for packing submission files.

The default script runs with single GPU. We use DDP for multi GPU training and validation, and the codes are also found in the bash scripts.
To reproduce our final results, you should follow the following steps
1. Use [scripts/train.sh](scripts/train.sh) with the [BC pre-training config](configs/experiment/pre_bc.yaml) to pre-train the SMART-tiny 7M model.
2. Use [scripts/train.sh](scripts/train.sh) with the [CLSFT with CAT-K config](configs/experiment/clsft.yaml) to fine-tune the SMART-tiny model pre-trained in step 1.
3. Use [scripts/wosac_sub.sh](scripts/wosac_sub.sh) to pack the submission fille for `validate` or `test` split. Upload the `wosac_submission.tar.gz` file located in `logs` folder to the [WOSAC leaderboard](https://waymo.com/open/challenges/2024/sim-agents/) such that you can evaluate the model fine-tuned in step 2 on the WOSAC leaderboard.
4. Alternatively, you can do local validation with [scripts/local_val.sh](scripts/local_val.sh).

For Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) based ego policy, the procedure is similar, just use the following configs
- [BC pre-training config for GMM-based ego policy](configs/experiment/ego_gmm_pre_bc.yaml)
- [CLSFT with CAT-K config for GMM-based ego policy](configs/experiment/ego_gmm_clsft.yaml)
- [Local validation config for GMM-based ego policy](configs/experiment/ego_gmm_local_val.yaml)
- There is no submission option for ego-policy.

## Performance

The submission of our CAT-K fine-tuned SMART to the [WOSAC Leaderboard](https://waymo.com/open/challenges/2024/sim-agents/) is found [here](https://waymo.com/open/challenges/sim-agents/results/5ea7a3eb-7337/1731338655639000/).
The submission of our reproduced SMART to the test split is found [here](https://waymo.com/open/challenges/sim-agents/results/5ea7a3eb-7337/1731391949275000/), note that it is not published to the leaderboard.

## Ablation configs

Please refer to [docs/ablation_models.md](docs/ablation_models.md) for the configurations of ablation models.
Specifically you will find the data augmentation methods used by [SMART](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.05844) and [Trajeglish](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.04535).

## Acknowledgement

Our code is based on [SMART](https://github.com/rainmaker22/SMART). We appreciate them for the valuable open-source code! Please don't forget to cite their amazing work as well!

Commit message:

Resolving the issue in the agent token vocabulary.

README.md, after:

# Closed-Loop Supervised Fine-Tuning of Tokenized Traffic Models


<p align="center">
     <img src="docs/catk_banner.png" alt="Closest Among Top-K (CAT-K) rollouts unroll the policy during fine-tuning in a way that visited states remain close to the ground-truth.", width=760px>
     <br/><strong>Closest Among Top-K (CAT-K) Rollouts</strong> unroll the policy during fine-tuning in a way that visited states remain close to the ground-truth (GT). At each time step, CAT-K first takes the top-K most likely action tokens according to the policy, then chooses the one leading to the state closest to the GT. As a result, CAT-K rollouts follow the mode of the GT (e.g., turning left), while random or top-K rollouts can lead to large deviations (e.g., going straight or right). Since the policy is essentially trained to minimize the distance between the rollout states and the GT states, the GT-based supervision remains effective for CAT-K rollouts, but not for random or top-K rollouts.
</p>

> **Closed-Loop Supervised Fine-Tuning of Tokenized Traffic Models**            
> [Zhejun Zhang](https://zhejz.github.io/), [Peter Karkus](https://karkus.tilda.ws/), [Maximilian Igl](https://maximilianigl.com/), [Wenhao Ding](https://wenhao.pub/), [Yuxiao Chen](https://research.nvidia.com/labs/avg/author/yuxiao-chen/), [Boris Ivanovic](https://www.borisivanovic.com/) and [Marco Pavone](https://web.stanford.edu/~pavone/index.html).<br/>
> 
> [Project Page](https://zhejz.github.io/catk)<br/>
> [arXiv Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.05334)

```bibtex
@article{zhang2024closed,
  title = {Closed-Loop Supervised Fine-Tuning of Tokenized Traffic Models},
  author = {Zhang, Zhejun and Karkus, Peter and Igl, Maximilian and Ding, Wenhao and Chen, Yuxiao and Ivanovic, Boris and Pavone, Marco},
  journal={arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05334},
  year = {2024},
}
```
## News & Updates

Jan. 2025
- **SoTA performance on WOSAC:** CAT-K is now rank #1 on the [WOSAC leaderboard](https://waymo.com/open/challenges/2024/sim-agents/)! We resolved an issue in the agent token vocabulary, and now our fine-tuned model achieves an RMM of **0.7702**. Even our reproduced SMART-tiny-7M (not published on the leaderboard, trained only for 32 epochs via BC) achieves an RMM of **0.7671**, which is comparable to the current second-place method. Reproducing our results should be straightforward. Give it a try!

- **Issue in the agent token vocabulary:** We discovered that the [agent token vocabulary file](src/smart/tokens/cluster_frame_5_2048_remove_duplicate.pkl) we were using (borrowed from the [SMART repository](https://github.com/rainmaker22/SMART/blob/main/smart/tokens/cluster_frame_5_2048.pkl)) was intended only for sanity checks and not for reproducing optimal performance. To resolve this, we added a [script](src/smart/tokens/traj_clustering.py) and used it to build an [appropriate agent token vocabulary](src/smart/tokens/agent_vocab_555_s2.pkl). Our script is based on the [k-disk clustering script from SMART](https://github.com/rainmaker22/SMART/blob/main/scripts/traj_clstering.py). Thanks to the updated agent tokens, all our traffic simulation models saw a significant performance improvement of approximately +0.0060 RMM!



## Installation
- The easy way to setup the environment is to create a [conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html) environment using the following commands
  ```
  conda create -y -n catk python=3.11.9
  conda activate catk
  conda install -y -c conda-forge ffmpeg=4.3.2
  pip install -r install/requirements.txt
  pip install torch_geometric
  pip install torch_scatter torch_cluster -f https://data.pyg.org/whl/torch-2.4.0+cu121.html
  pip install --no-deps waymo-open-dataset-tf-2-12-0==1.6.4
  ```
- Alternatively, a better way is to use the [Dockerfile](install/Dockerfile) and build your own docker. We found the code runs faster in the docker for some reasons.
- We use [WandB](https://wandb.ai/) for logging. You can register an account for free.
- **Be aware**
  - We use 8 *NVIDIA A100 (80GB)* for training and validation, the training and fine-tuning take a few days, whereas the validation and testing take a few hours.
  - We cannot share pre-trained models according to the [terms](https://waymo.com/open/terms) of the Waymo Open Motion Dataset.


## Dataset preparation
- Download the [Waymo Open Motion Dataset](https://waymo.com/open/download/). We use v1.2.1.
- Use [scripts/cache_womd.sh](scripts/cache_womd.sh) to preprocess the dataset into pickle files to accelerate data loading during the training and evaluation.
- You should pack three datasets: `training`, `validation` and `testing`.

## Run the code
In the scripts, we provide
- [scripts/train.sh](scripts/train.sh) for training and fine-tuning.
- [scripts/local_val.sh](scripts/local_val.sh) for local validation.
- [scripts/wosac_sub.sh](scripts/wosac_sub.sh) for packing submission files.

The default script runs with single GPU. We use DDP for multi GPU training and validation, and the codes are also found in the bash scripts.
To reproduce our final results, you should follow the following steps
1. Use [scripts/train.sh](scripts/train.sh) with the [BC pre-training config](configs/experiment/pre_bc.yaml) to pre-train the SMART-tiny 7M model.
2. Use [scripts/train.sh](scripts/train.sh) with the [CLSFT with CAT-K config](configs/experiment/clsft.yaml) to fine-tune the SMART-tiny model pre-trained in step 1.
3. Use [scripts/wosac_sub.sh](scripts/wosac_sub.sh) to pack the submission fille for `validate` or `test` split. Upload the `wosac_submission.tar.gz` file located in `logs` folder to the [WOSAC leaderboard](https://waymo.com/open/challenges/2024/sim-agents/) such that you can evaluate the model fine-tuned in step 2 on the WOSAC leaderboard.
4. Alternatively, you can do local validation with [scripts/local_val.sh](scripts/local_val.sh).

For Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) based ego policy, the procedure is similar, just use the following configs
- [BC pre-training config for GMM-based ego policy](configs/experiment/ego_gmm_pre_bc.yaml)
- [CLSFT with CAT-K config for GMM-based ego policy](configs/experiment/ego_gmm_clsft.yaml)
- [Local validation config for GMM-based ego policy](configs/experiment/ego_gmm_local_val.yaml)
- There is no submission option for ego-policy.

## Performance

The submission of our CAT-K fine-tuned SMART to the [WOSAC Leaderboard](https://waymo.com/open/challenges/2024/sim-agents/) is found [here](https://waymo.com/open/challenges/sim-agents/results/5ea7a3eb-7337/1731338655639000/).
The submission of our reproduced SMART to the test split is found [here](https://waymo.com/open/challenges/sim-agents/results/5ea7a3eb-7337/1731391949275000/), note that it is not published to the leaderboard.

## Ablation configs

Please refer to [docs/ablation_models.md](docs/ablation_models.md) for the configurations of ablation models.
Specifically you will find the data augmentation methods used by [SMART](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.05844) and [Trajeglish](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.04535).

## Acknowledgement

Our code is based on [SMART](https://github.com/rainmaker22/SMART). We appreciate them for the valuable open-source code! Please don't forget to cite their amazing work as well!
